---
layout: post
title: The Alabaster Amphora
author: Berni
---

We talked about this great story on Friday.  I translated it from a
chapter of the book "[In meinem Herzen Feuer][book]" (_Fire in my
Heart_) by Johannes Hartl.

[book]: https://www.amazon.de/dp/3417266106

---

This is the first hot day this spring.  The wind turned last night and
now it blows warm air from Negev over Bethany.  This is the last week
before the big feast.  There are already a few dozen pilgrims who, just
like this time every year, move into their quarters in the small towns
right behind the Olive Tree Mountain.  Commercial activities carried out
on the streets, flocks of sheep and children yelling...

The last few days had been exhausting.  Hiking through different places,
quarrelling with more and more hostile pharisees and rabbis.  Whispered
claims of a murder plot...  Apparently everywhere in Jerusalem people
are talking about Jesus and the resurrected Lazarus.  Worrying gossips
can be heard from Herod's palace.

Jesus is exhausted too.  The way from Ephraim was dusty and steep.  They
departed in the morning and they are just rejoicing over meeting their
friends in Bethany.  Jesus was sometimes strange in the last few days.
He talked anxiously about his pilgrimage to Jerusalem.  About conflicts,
betrayal and about dying.  How good that these can be forgotten as they
see the first mud huts in Bethany which stand on the mountainside.  The
synagogue with its curly roof beams, the village dwellings and, like
everywhere: gathering children, curiously staring or happily waving
village people.  Jesus is back again.  But there’s no preaching today,
no visit to the synagogue, and no healing.

A small, paved path along a stonewall, a few steps from the village
center, leads to Simon's estate.  Yes, that widowed spice grocer who
became sick from leprosy a few years ago, shortly after which he had to
be excluded from the village and shortly after which he passed away.
The house of Lazarus and his older sisters who cared for him and the
household instead of his parents.

"Shalom lach, Marjam", Jesus says, entering the room first.  With
complete joy Maria turns around: "Jeshua! Shalom lecha!" she says,
shining.  "I didn't know that you would arrive so early! Take a seat!"
The younger ones also enter.  Martha and Lazarus hurry to them.  "How
beautiful it is that you are here!" says Martha and hands over a clay
bowl filled with water to wash their hands.  "You must be hungry."

She immediately disappears into the kitchen.  Lazarus lies down at the
table.  "How good it is to be here again!" Jesus says, as he takes a sip
from the cup in front of him.  Oil lamps will be lit, bread and spicy
dip will be served.

Jesus is the honoured guest.  The family's friend.  "Tell us Jesus,
where have you been? We heard you have some enemies." The guys tell them
about the last week's journeys, the wanders and the quarrels.  Here
comes Martha.  You must taste this wine, I bought it for Passover, but I
will use this jar today.  Pickled olives, ewe's milk cheese, raisins and
fresh, crunchy pita: a feast meal for Jesus.  They hand around salt,
herbs and olive oil in a small bowl for the cheese.  A joyful
conversation starts about common memories, happy events and every now
and then a word from Jesus that pricks up their ears.

Suddenly Maria stands up from the table.  She was silent so far —as
always she just looked at Jesus, listened to his words.  The
conversations at the table, eating, the work— all of these seem to her
to happen just in the background.  She disappears into the side room and
for some minutes her absence is hardly noticed.  None of the guests
notice as she silently enters the living room again from the back.  In
the shadows, out of the oil lamps' cone of light she approaches Jesus.
No one guesses what is about to happen.  And as Maria starts, some
seconds pass before anyone can react.  In her arm she carries an
alabaster amphora, artistically designed, shimmering in light
rose-tones.  This is one of those bottles that one can find on markets
at the spice merchants, only those are usually smaller.  The bottle is
sealed.  Immediately it will be clear for Martha and Lazarus what Maria
is doing.  They know that bottle.

Their father, Simon, inherited a small shop from his father.  He bought
mastic, baldanum and similar incense resins from Persian merchants in
Jericho and he sold them in Jerusalem.  He extended his business further
with noble spiced wine from Lebanon, red make-up from Tyrus, Kassia and
India and cloves from Egypt.  He himself produced perfumes and mixes for
embalmment and therefore he owned a small collection of the noblest and
most expensive fragrances.

To acquire such an amount of spikenard was seldom.  But it seemed to be
the business of his life: pure, valuable nard from the land between the
Euphrates and Tigris.  He got to smell a few drops and it was enough:
this was the finest spikenard he had ever seen.  He saw in front of his
eyes dozens of big embalmment amphoras that he could make smell
gloriously with a few drops of this aroma essence.  The oil's price was
high.  He had to invest a grand part of his liquid funds.  150, 200,
250, 300 silver coins...  he counted on the table of the caravan leader.
But he could produce expensive perfumes with this essence for several
years and aim for a good turnover.

All of these run through Martha's and Lazarus' head: the father passed
away two years ago.  Martha, the oldest one inherited the house, Lazarus
inherited the liquid funds and the land on the hills.  And Maria - the
still sealed amphora.  The spike oil is her whole inheritance.  Her
financial safety, her marriage portion and through that the only chance
to find a man, have children and social safety.

She holds exactly this alabaster amphora in her hands and...  with a
confident movement she breaks the bottle's thin neck and starts to pour
the content on Jesus' head.  Eyes and mouths stay open in shock - she
shakes the oil properly.  That oil from which already very few,
carefully dosed drops are enough to aromatise all the king’s men.

Still she does not stop there.  A thin, shiny trickle runs out of the
broken alabaster.  It moistens Jesus' thick hair, runs over his
forehead, soaks in the edges of his garment.  She is nearing Jesus'
feet.  She pours it richly over them too and she massages the perfume in
with her hands.  The flowery essence possession captures the whole room
like an explosion of the charming fragrance.  Sweet, oriental, tempting
and endlessly saturated, awaking thousand memories and beguiling the
senses.  "What is she doing?" is written on the faces of the visitors
and some of them articulate it by whispering as well.  And it is not
enough yet.  With a deft movement she pulls the veil of her hair and
frees the wooden clasp from her thick, dark brown hair, falling down in
long waves now.  Holding her head very close to Jesus' feet, she winds
her hair around his feet like a towel to dry them.

This is really going too far.  Everything smells like spike oil: it is
dripping from Jesus' head, his garment, his feet, Maria's hair and it
runs on the covers Jesus lies on.

"What's all this fuss about?", explodes Judas.  "That is spike oil, it
is worth a fortune.  One could have sold it for 300 Denarius and give
the money to the poor.  What a nonsensical waste." The others also
agree: "This was her inheritance!" "If Simon would know!" "This is
really excessive!" "Why doesn't Jesus say a word?" "Imagine, 300
Denarius."

But Jesus doesn't seem to hear all of that.  Rather than smiling, he
silently and knowingly looks at Maria, whose eyes are steadfastly
directed to him.

"Let her!", he says, as if he would talk rather to her than to the
others.  "You will always have the poor, but not me.  I tell you,
wherever on the whole earth the gospel will be declared, people will
talk about what she has done."

It is a few days later.  His hair and his garment hasn't been washed
since then.  It is the day before the Passover.  Maria's oil is still in
his thick, wavy hair, as the first stick hits his head.  His forehead
seems to shimmer from that oil as the finger long thorns sting through
his skin up to the skull bones.  As they tear his clothes from his
wounded body, his garments smell like oil as Psalm 45 promised.  As his
feet are pierced through by the nails, they remember her hair on his
skin.  And in the last moment before Jesus' senses fade away on the
cross...  he can smell the spike oil on his skin.  "Maria anointed this
body for the burial.  She has done good to me.  This will never be
forgotten of her."

